I got hoes.
>> Let's go. Let's go.
[Music]
All right.
>> Oh, you're recording me. I didn't know.
I didn't know we were YouTubing this. I
thought we were just recording for the
All right. So, today we've got a bit of
a change of plans with everything. What
we're doing is last few weeks I've had a
few niggles. My shoulder hurt. If you
notice that I did a 200 kg bench press,
I wanted three reps, got two. This week
I came in and I thought, you know what,
I'm going to lose the pressure. I'm not
going to be on any type of program. I'm
going to see how I feel with my
shoulder. Now, my shoulder isn't
perfect. So, therefore, I don't want to
risk going super heavy like in the 200
kg range. My best recently was 210 kg.
The goal is to get to 220 and to play
with those numbers. I think that it's
not wise to do that while I'm uncertain.
So, what I decided was today I'm just
going to see how it feels really. I
don't want to set a program because I
don't think I can stick to it right now.
My shoulder's feeling slightly better
every single time, but I want it to be
perfect before I dive back into the
heavy weights. So, if you're following,
you know what happened with my quad. I
tore my quad. It's getting so much
better. It's great. I squatted 220 for
four reps really comfortably a couple of
days ago. So, that's on track. And while
I'm recovering, I want to get everything
else right. So, I'm getting my nutrition
right. I'm on a little bit of a deficit.
So, also factor in my health because
there's a whole thing, eat big, lift
big, and that's true. The more calories
you eat, it's easier to get stronger.
So, I got to a point where I was about
104 kg and not as lean as I'd like to
be, but that's okay. To compete in the
100 class, my goal would actually be to
be 105 and then do a bit of a water cut
and get to 100 kg, 24 hours weight cut.
I mean, that's what's happening at the
highest level, and I wouldn't bother
with that, unless, of course, I was
going to go for a record, which to be
honest with you, it's not impossible for
me to go for an Australian record. So,
therefore, while I'm recovering for
everything, I'm just going to take it
easy. My quads almost back to fully
recovered. I would say maybe I'm about a
month or two away from that. But while
I'm waiting, I want to get my health
right. I want to get my body
composition, you know, nice and lean so
that when everything's fully recovered,
then I can say, "Good. Let's drive the
calories higher. Let's push harder with
the weights and then let's start going
for these big numbers again. But for
now, so 160 kilograms for 11 reps.
What's the significance of that? Well,
160 for 10 has been my kind of like the
local top for quite some time. So
beating that just by a single rep, that
gives me the confidence to know I'm
still moving forward. But what I'm going
to do is I'm going to talk to you today
about D loads. Now, the reason why I
want to talk about D loads is because
it's got a little bit of negative
attention recently where a lot of people
are now saying that it's unnecessary.
Um, and some people say it is necessary.
And like all things, the answer lies
somewhere in between. So, I do de los
and I think they're quite important. And
to add more context to that, the best
lifters in the world load right before
they compete and then they go and break
world records. So, to say that they
don't work is just not true. But on the
other side of the spectrum, absolute
beginners doing programs where they're
planning in de loss uh because they need
some type of recovery is also what I
consider to be unnecessary because there
is one golden rule with dloads and that
is you need to load before you de load.
Now what does that mean? It means
beginners are typically in the first 12
months. So if you're in the first 12
months of your training, you probably
don't need to worry about dloads. And if
I'm programming someone in the first 12
months, I won't program a dload in. You
can just kind of keep on going forward.
I'm going to talk about the reason why a
lot of people say that D loads don't
work. And that's some recent research by
Dr. Coleman and colleagues in I think it
was 2023 or 2024 where they did a 9-week
study. They had 39 participants doing
whole body training and they did one
group trained for 9 weeks straight. The
other group trained for four weeks, took
a week off in between and trained for
another four weeks. What they found was
hypertrophy. There was not really any
difference at all. But from a strength
standpoint, the group that trained all
the way through got slightly better
results in strength. Now, I believe that
a lot of people are listening to people
quoting this research saying therefore
dloads don't work. And I'd like to push
back on that idea. The reason why I'd
like to push back on it is two main
reasons. The group of people that they
did the dloads on, they said that they
were minimum of one year of training
age. So, I don't know how many years
above one year, but it was a minimum of
one year. So, in my opinion, that's not
really that strong. So, you can't really
get hugely strong in a year. So
typically that type of lifter can
probably do without a dload lo you know
on exception like maybe if it's a really
exceptional human and they're very
strong maybe they might need a de lo but
typically maybe not like maybe but if
they did need a de lo this is the next
thing I would never really give a week
of entire rest that's what I would
consider the last strategy that I would
use and I would only use a week of
complete rest if life forces it such as
co you got sick take a week off and
don't feel bad about it come bag and get
back to your training. Holidays, family
holidays, hectic week at work, something
where life forces you to take an entire
week off and it's out of your control.
Take a week off and don't worry so much
about it. Is that optimal for
competition prep? Of course, it's not.
But sometimes you have no choice. And if
that's the case, I'll tell you right
now, you're not going to lose a huge
amount of strength or muscle if you take
a week off. So, let's just say I was to
plan a D lo, what is my strategy? Well,
this is what I would have done in this
Coleman study. And I don't want to say
of course I would have a better outcome.
So what I will do is say you know with
my own experience I get a great outcome
with progression when I de load this way
but also some more research by Dr.
Hayden Pritchard who's a good friend of
mine. He's done his thesis on tapering
which is a similar concept but just
under a different name. And what they
found well firstly the difference
between tapering and de loing is
tapering is what's done at the end of
the program before competition. I just
call that a dload but anyway that's
called a tapering. and the D load is
considered what's done in the middle of
the long-term plan. Okay. So if that's
the difference then I don't think that
we can discount the research that is
titled tapering which is Hayden
Pritchard's research. So what is his
strategy? His strategy is not to take an
entire week off. His strategy is to
reduce the training volume by 30 to 70%
and maintain or even slightly increase
the intensity plus you know 2 to 4 days
of completely no training and that's
what they would do before a competition.
So this is the strategy that they would
use to peak their athlete for
competition and the results were a it
was like a one one to six% increase in
performance uh which seems like it's not
a huge amount and it's not a huge amount
but you know in terms of de loing and
getting a small increase or allowance
for recovery and a small increase in
performance after a phase of de loing
then that's absolutely worth it. So
what's the strategy again? It's reducing
volume and maintaining intensity. Why
would they do that? And I'll tell you
the main reason is because the biggest
contributor to fatigue is volume, not
intensity. Okay? So intensity means the
amount of weight that you lift. Of
course, that's fatiguing, but it's not
as big of a contributor as the total
amount of volume that you're pushing. So
therefore, the first thing that I would
recommend if you are going to consider a
D load is a reduction in volume. How do
you reduce your volume? Well, the way
that I do it is very simple. I just have
the amount of sets you got to do for the
day. So let's just say you got to do
four sets of five. Instead of doing four
sets, do two sets. And same goes for the
accessories. So the percentage according
to Dr. Hayden's research was 30 to 70%.
I don't need you to calculate 30 to 70%.
Having the volume is 50%. So that's what
you should be doing. And then what do
you do with the intensity? Well, his
research as well as what I do is you
follow the logical incremental increase.
So let's just say your program allows
for, you know, like 5% increases from
week to week. So week one is 100 kg,
105, 110. On the final week, follow the
same logical progression. So, I hit 115
kg on the last week, but reduce the
amount of total volume. Does that make
sense? So, that's my de loing strategy
and that's something that I want to
consider right now. Um, I know that top
set of 160 kg didn't represent what I
was doing. That's kind of just a mental
thing while I'm coming out of a little
bit of a sore spot with, you know, my my
quad tear and a little bit of shoulder
pain. Just making sure that
psychologically I'm still performing.
But that's what I'm going to be
considering right now. So, I hope you
learned a thing or two about D loses.
And that's how I would perform a D load.
And I do recommend they are important if
you're strong enough to be able to do it
in the first place. So, this one I don't
need to lay back. It's far.
Okay. Ready?
Okay.
Yep.
It's pretty hard.
Okay. So, that is called mid-grip spotto
press. So, spotto press technically
that's not what a spotto press is. It
almost is. That's how a lot of people
perform it. But spotto press is named
after a fellow by the name of Eric Spot
who was formerly the world's record
holding bench presser. So, I think his
bench press was 326 kg or thereabouts.
and he used to bench press in a way that
he didn't touch his chest. And a lot of
people considered that's not going all
the way down or it's cheating or
whatever it is. And it's like it's not
really cheating. If anything, it's
making it harder. So, a lot of the times
people bounce the bar off their chest.
And in competition, it really doesn't
matter what your training technique is
as long as you pause the weight on your
chest. So, the rules in a competition is
to bring the bar to your chest and when
the bar is motionless, the judge will
give the press call. It doesn't really
mean. So, of course, that means you come
to a pause, but there's no really rule
in the rule book that you have to pause
it. The bar must be motionless. So, how
do you make the bar motionless? You've
got to pause it, obviously. And if
you're wobbling around, it's going to be
a longer pause. The bar needs to be
completely still. Once the ref sees that
it's completely still, he'll say press.
So, in training or whatever, it doesn't
really matter when people say you're
cheating for whatever reason, as long as
you show up on comp day. And of course,
Eric Spot did. He was the best in the
world. And so, that was his technique.
He used to just bring it down to just
short of his chest. So, I don't know, an
inch away or a centimeter away, but not
actually touch his chest, which I
consider to be harder. It's like, think
about a Romanian deadlift where you
don't touch the ground and you have to
bring the slow it down. So, decelerate,
stop, and change direction without
assistance from the ground. Or you can
do a touchandgo rep where you bounce it
off the ground. Even if it's a light
tap, that light tap will stop the it'll
stop you from having to decelerate the
weight and change direction, which takes
a lot of energy. So, a light tap and go
deadlift is a lot easier than not
letting it touch the ground. Same with
benching and not letting it touch your
chest. So, the way that I do a spot
press is with a pause. I'm pretty sure
that's not how it's how he did it. Um,
but I call that that's just how I do my
spot presses, which I quite like. So,
what that does is it teaches me to be
strong on the chest. It also teaches me
to stay tight in that bottom position.
So, that's a big weakness in a lot of
people is they have a strong lockout,
but off the chest, it's kind of like if
if that's you, you should think about
this. If you are weak off the chest,
this is one of my favorite exercises for
two reasons. It increases the time under
tension in that area. So, it emphasizes
strengthening that area. But the next
thing it does is it forces you to have
to have all of your the right muscles on
and active during that pause process.
And you're not resting on your chest,
you're resting on the muscles. So, that
increases tension. A lot of the times,
if you're weak off the chest, I don't
even think it's weakness. I think it's a
lack of understanding of how to stay
tight under load. So, if you look like a
wet sponge or the analogy that I like to
use is imagine me walking down the
street with the basketball, the speed up
of the basketball should match the speed
down. If it's flat, if there's not
enough air in the ball, it won't bounce
properly. That's the analogy that I use
for all of these lifts. If you lack
tension, that's what the barbell looks
like. It looks like a flat basketball or
a wet sponge. The speed up, it must be
explosive out of the hole, just like a
ball will bounce off the floor. So, spot
press with a pause is my favorite way of
increasing your strength off the chest.
teaches you how to stay tight under
load. And if you're failing your bench
press because you're not strong enough
to press it off your chest, you should
be doing this exercise. I'm going to do
one more set of this
2 by six. That's pretty good. I think
that's enough for my top sets. I'm going
to do some uh accessory dumbbell work,
but that's a nice new variation for me
to practice as my main work for the next
phase while I'm not needing to test my
max in a while. So, I'm not peeking for
a competition. So, I don't need to be
starting with the exact competition
style. In fact, I've been doing that for
some time. So it's good to incre it's
good to include a little bit of
variation from time to time and that's
my variation. So a lot of the times
people talk about variation as if
shouldn't do too much variation. We need
to be more specific of course but the
variations that I choose have huge
relevance to the main work. So my
variation isn't push-ups or or machine
work or anything like that. It's still
barbell pushing it off my chest like a
bench press, but it's just a slight
variation of that. Now the things that I
love about that exactly what I mentioned
with the spotto press is it increases
the strength of the chest. one of those
exercises you can't be too strong off
the chest. So even if it's not a
weakness including that for me it's not
a weakness I'm quite strong off my chest
but that could be why because I spend a
lot of time making sure that I'm strong
off my chest with exercises like this
but if you are weak off the chest
including spotter presses so the next
thing that you'll notice there's a few
different things that I did here one I
didn't bring my feet back and get into
that arch position and I use the mid
grip. So, the reason why I did that is
because when I'm doing a competition
bench press, I bring my feet back and
arch and do all those things so that I
can reduce the range of motion. So,
that's the wide grip is shorter range of
motion and arching and really pinning my
shoulder blades back. That decreases the
distance that I need to travel, which is
better for shifting heavy loads. But
now, while I'm further away from really
testing my max, I'm giving myself a bit
of a break. I can do other exercises
where I explore longer ranges of motion,
which is actually better for building
muscle. It's better for muscle
hypertrophy. So, I'm not saying that a
bench press doesn't build muscle, like
the way that I do my comp style. It
absolutely does. But if I was to choose
one variation where the bench press has
the best carryover for muscle building
in in the bench press muscles, which is
kind of pecs, triceps, and deltoids, I
would choose mid-grip flat feet. So,
that spot variation is just a bit of a
bonus add-on where it increases the
strength off the chest. But from a
muscle building standpoint, midgrip, it
allows me to use a longer range of
motion. So now let's get to another
press variation which is even longer
range of motion and that's a close grip.
Even longer range of motion, why
wouldn't I use that? Well, that changes
the angle of my humorous to completely
tucked. So the close grip, it actually
is a longer range of motion, but the
muscle that takes that extra range of
motion is the triceps. So great for
triceps, but doesn't necessarily
increase the pec activation. So what I
want is, yeah, long range of motion, but
I still want to position my pecs in the
optimal position to build. So what is
that? So let's go into the anatomy of
the pecs. Why don't I show you on my
bony friend over here? So the pecs
attach to the front of the humorris
here. So right here on the front of the
humorris, that's the insertion. Okay?
And the attachment points. So the origin
is here on the sternum. So that's the
sternal portion. It also comes
underneath here on rib cartilagages, but
that's the sternal portion. And then the
upper pec fibers are on the clavicle. So
that's the collarbone or that's the
clavvicular portion. So what happens is
if you think about the anatomy and where
they attach. So think about how you want
to stretch your chest. So with my arm by
my side here, my pec is pretty relaxed.
As I bring my arm further and further,
think about how you stretch your chest.
What we're doing is increasing. So we're
taking that attachment point further and
further away from the origin. Do you get
it? So when you take that point away
from that, it creates tension on the
muscle. So when the elbows are tucked
in, that is less tension on the muscle,
which means I'm not using the muscle as
much, which means I have to use other
muscles more, such as the triceps. Now,
that means there's two good reasons for
using a close grip bench press. One is
if we wanted to use it for a tricep
builder, or two, if I want to give my
pecs a rest for whatever reason. So, you
might be recovering from a a pec tear or
some type of a pec strain and you want
to use your pec a little bit less in the
recovery process or the rehabilitation
process. This is where tucking the
elbows to a close grip position can take
off some of that strain and allow you to
continue to strengthen that pushing
pattern without further aggravating the
chest. So that's another reason why you
might hear people say not to flare the
elbows. So watch what happens to the
attachment point when I flare the
elbows. That's even further away. That's
how I would stretch my pecs with flared
elbows. In powerlifting competition, you
hear the cue, tuck the elbows. So that's
one of the reasons why you might want to
tuck the elbows. Flaring the elbows all
the way like this creates the most
tension on the peg, which sounds like
it's a good idea. And for building
muscle, maybe it is a good idea.
However, here's the negatives for
training the muscle in its fully
lengthened position. There's a thing
called a length tension relationship of
every muscle. Typically, the mid-range
of the muscle contraction is where it is
at its strongest. And where it's at its
weakest, is typically the fully
stretched or the fully shortened
position. So, the mid-range, which is
typically where kind of the arm is about
here. So, kind of semi-tucked. So,
flared, tucked, well, kind of relaxed
tucked. So, this is how I'd bench press
in a powerlifting competition. positions
my pec in its mid-range, which is the
strongest contraction, or completely by
the side, which is where it's got the
least tension on it and therefore the
least involvement of that muscle. So,
that's one of the reasons why people say
don't flare your elbows in a bench press
for powerlifting competition. Now,
there's a difference between powerlters
and bodybuilders, and that is typically
the amount of weight that's being
lifted. In powerlifting, you're doing
your one rep max. In bodybuilding,
you're not. In bodybuilding, one rep is
typically not the best rep range to be
building muscle. what is so usually
bodybuilders are working kind of in the
8 to 12 rep range and therefore the
loads are a lot lighter. So if you're
flaring the elbows like this in a bench
press and you're using lighter loads,
don't listen to the feedback where
people where powerlifters especially say
it's bad to bench press with your elbows
flared because it's bad for the
shoulders and bad for the pecs and all
these things. Yeah, maybe if you're
testing a one rep max, but if you're not
actually that's a really good way of
strengthening or building the pec muscle
in the fully lengthened position. So
that's called a guillotine press. And if
you have a look at a lot of the best
bodybuilders when they do a bench press,
they might flare their elbows. So next
time you hear someone say flare your
elbows when you bench press, now you
know why. Flaring your elbows could be
exactly what you want to be doing. Now
I'm just going to add a little bit more
context to this. Another reason why
people say don't flare the elbows in a
bench press. So look what happens. So
that's my elbows flared. So right here
we have muscles that pass through this
space here. So that's called the
acchromian. Right? All right. So this
bone here, this part of the shoulder
blade, that's called the acchromian. And
above this spine of the scapula, come
over here. So above here sits a muscle
called the suprapinatus. That's one of
the rotator cuff muscles. It sits here
and it passes underneath the acchromian
and it attaches to the end of the
humorus here to the top of the upper
arm. And that's one of the rotator cuff
muscles that abducts the humorus. So
what happens is as I'm abducting the
humorris, look at the space here. So
this is where the tendon passes through.
And as I abduct the humorus, I'm
shortening that space for that tendon.
And this is called impingement, which is
where the bone rubs on the tendon. And
that could be problematic for some
people, not all people. Okay? So, let me
go further into this because when I lift
my arm, as I lift my arm, this is a
skeleton that doesn't move. But when I
lift my arm, the scapula will rotate
with it. Do you get it? So, this the
scapula is not rotating. But some
people, it doesn't rotate very well. And
that's the mechanism of the impingement.
If your scapula doesn't move freely like
it should be, that could be why you're
experiencing shoulder pain. But if you
do have healthy shoulders, when you
abduct your humorris, the scapula comes
with it and it should be okay. So when
you hear people say flaring the elbows
causes impingement on the shoulders
sometimes and that's the mechanism and
now you know. So if that's you and you
don't experience pain with your elbows
flared and you're doing bench presses
with higher rep range, that could be a
really good move and that's a really
great way of building pecs. But if
you're doing a one rep max with your
elbows flared and it doesn't impinge
that muscle, there's another reason why
you might not want to be in that
position. And that is it's positioning
your pec in the fully lengthened
position. And that's one of the weakest
contractile strength positions for any
muscle is it's fully stretched position.
So this is why if you're going for a
1RM, there needs to be some tuck of the
elbow. Not completely tucked. Don't just
exaggerate that. That's another problem
that a lot of people do. They overly
tuck because they've overheard that cue.
Tuck the elbows. And that's also not
entirely right. Anyway, that was
in-depth discussion on whether you
should or shouldn't tuck your elbows.
And now you know. You're welcome. All
right. Next, dumbbells. Okay. Now, I'm
going to go do some more accessory work.
I'm going to go and do some arms, which
I did last week. So, I'm not going to do
more of that for you guys to see. I hope
you enjoyed today's session. That's a
long discussion on D losses. Hope you
understand now whether you should or
shouldn't do a dload. And if you want to
learn about something else, put in the
comments section below. Otherwise,
subscribe for some more information that
I give you guys for free that I had to
spend a lot of time and effort and money
to learn for the last two decades in the
industry and it's yours for free. How
good is that? Just click subs, sub
subscribe. That's all you need to do to
support my channel. Thank you very much
if you already have subscribed and I
hope you enjoyed this session and I'll
see you guys next time.